What facilities were there across the tracks then
for this physical training? Nothing except the
road, and down there there was an animal husbandry
thing, which later on I'd go visit and see them
doing artificial insemination. Toward the
north? Toward the north, yes. There was one
building over there, there was a farmhouse. We'd
run down to the farmhouse in the corner there,
about where
that... shelter is for Olsen Field, somewhere in
that area. And basically around Olsen Field, back
down to Mileshamton. And they told us they were
going to grade us on the time we did it in. And so you
really, where you were fat, if you were not fat, it
doesn't make any difference. They're going to
grade you on that. They didn't do it, but they set
the thermos with it. So you'd be busy till 4 o'clock
or so. Yeah. Well, and then the afternoon, most of
the time, we'd play intramural sports. Mm-hmm. It
kept us busy. I mean, there was very little leisure
time.
I enjoyed it. Alright, then back to the room, clean
up, fall out, march to evening chow. Yeah, evening
chow. We'd come back and we had to study with the
door open and sit at our desk and have our head down
at a book. So we developed a knack of sleeping in
that position. Describe your room. Oh, room. You
could not have no carpet, nothing on the walls, one
picture of somebody, mother and father,
girlfriend, one picture. Very Spartan. And at
that time, I began to think of A&M and Sparta to
Texas University, Athens. I mean, I was that mold.
I was a typical Aggie. I thought about it in many
ways, and so I thought we were smarter than they
were. We lived a smarter life. How long did it take
you and your fish buddies to start trying some kind
of pranks or tricks on the upperclassmen? It would
probably have been close to a semester. Float out,
take a box of scabs, which were corn flakes, soak
them in a bucket of water all day, and then have a
great joy of throwing them into somebody's bed
with them in the middle of the night and running
from the campus cops, the KKs, and jumping in bed,
and they're chasing you. It's laying there in one
of the flashlights, and you're pretending you're
asleep and getting away with it. Great joy, great
thrill. Yeah, if anybody got caught, what kind of
punishment did they get from the upper class? The
upper class, yeah, well, they'd probably get
their tails beat. With what kind of a paddle? Uh...
probably a shaved-down baseball bat or softball
bat. Do you remember ever getting a paddle? I don't
remember. As I said, I lived a very protective life
somehow, being, A, not giving anybody a hard time,
not wising off to anybody, and, B, having the
protection of Mr. Bildevich. There were some
things I could stick in there. Like Mr. Spears came
in one time about 2 o'clock in the morning and woke
me up and said his girlfriend was coming in the next
morning at 7 o'clock, and I had to get him up at 6
o'clock and sort of go down and beat the train for
the girl. And I didn't wake up sufficient. I did so
long. I mean, he just woke me up and told me, and my
head hit the thing, and I was gone. The next day he
saw me. He said, who's 40? I thought I told you to get
me up. I don't remember if you did, but I just, I did
not do it deliberately and everything else, but I
mean, I was just sound asleep when he woke me up, you
know, back to sleep. When he turned around and
turned his heel, I was back sound asleep and
totally escaped. Did he give you any punishment?
No, he did not. Where did you and your buddies... go
if you had some spare time during the day, just to go
to relax, to... Why did you go? What did you do over
there? Read the newspapers. I did. They
had newspapers from all over the state. If anybody
wasn't eager to sit there and read them. Now, I
don't want to transpose myself into my coming back
to the Marines. That's difficult.
Mostly, if we didn't play in New York, we'd go out
and do pickup athletic games, you know, touch
football. Where, physically, where would y'all
play those games? There were all kinds of empty
spaces around the dorms, yeah. They were locked,
they were out in the middle of what now they call the
quad, middle of the new area. There were a drill
field all over. I mean, just, there was never any,
all right. In dorm, what do we call dorm 13, 14, 16 in
that area. There was empty space in between them
there. There were many faculty and staff houses on
campus then, weren't there? Oh, yes. That's
another thing that caught me. Joe Falk had a house
just about where Kane Hall is in that area. And my
parents and other CCC people would come to
football games. And you have open houses pretty
much. And all these old friends would come in there
and see each other Dr. Munson was one of them that
they knew, too. He had been at CCCU. He was an
educational advisor or something. I don't know
what he had done there, but my dad knew him pretty
well. And I don't know how, I don't know, but they
would all come in there. And as a kid, I thought,
this is the life. This is the most beautiful life
that I can imagine. Come in here and see all your
friends and then go down to the football game, walk
down right to Kyle Field, park out in Simpson Drill
Field, go over to the Hawks, then go on into the
game. And everybody there remembering old times
and enjoying themselves, catching up on times.
When I came back, I wanted to get as close to the
campers as I could. If I could move right there, I'd
move there.
Then on the weekends, what would you all do? On the
weekends during the summer, there was no football
games. Saturday classes, same thing. I did not go
to church. I never darkened the door of a church.
We'd go to the dances, I guess. But Saturday night
in the summer, there weren't any dances, were
there? There weren't any dances, no. I mean...
Just entertain ourselves. Did you go to Guyon?
Were there movies? We'd go to the campus theater.
We'd go into, catch a ride into Bryan, go to movies
at Bryan if we could, get off. Some of these, you
know, I have to go back and thought about these
particular questions. But I do remember walking
the streets of Guyon in khaki uniforms. How did the
people of the community react to people, to young
men wearing khaki uniforms? Fine, no problem.
They were used to Aggies here. I was thinking the
other day, coming in here, just think that act of
legislature that established the Agricultural
Mechanical College of Texas here, and what has
developed that one little act, and you look at this
big, almost metropolis now, and had they not done
that, Bryan would have been probably smaller than
that or so. Do you remember, have any idea what the
cost was that first year? Well, I'll tell you.
Yeah, my brother had a bank account who had lost
$900. And he said he had left instruction that was
to be used for my education. So my mother and father
transferred it over to my account. And I paid my
entire first year out of that $900. It seems to me
that... room was $7 a semester, and board was
relatively the same. And how much spending money
did you have? Well, I was working and I had a
checking account on that, so I had sufficient, but
I didn't spend much. I still had money left over at
the end of the semester, you know, at the end of the
year. All right, back to, I think I heard a touching
item, so that Much of your education was paid for by
your brother's account, and he'd already died in
action. Yeah. He was missing in action legally at
that time. July 1, 1943.
The war certainly was the topic. Where did you and
your buddies listen to the radio and get war news?
In our room. What were some of the events that you
remember almost where you were when you heard the
news, D-Day being one? Oh, D-Day being one. Before
that, I remember invasion of North Africa.
Let me go through my historical data here. D-Day,
June, and you're about to break out going across
France. Then,
next big thing, Battle of the Bulge. It wasn't a big
thing of mine, but we were aware of it. And I was home
on Christmas vacation when that occurred, just
before I went to the Marines. I was just getting
ready to go to the Marines. I didn't know it when I
came back from Christmas vacation. And remember,
the semesters transpired over. We had your
Christmas, New Year's break, about three weeks of
school after that. And then it's hard to get back
when my parents got worried I was going to report to
the Senate. Right, so you take a full load that
summer. Right. How cool were those dormitories?
Oh, that's another thing we got in that
engineering. Because we moved from Walton Hall to
Hart Hall. I was up on the top stoop floor of Hart
Hall, corner there. There was three of us in a room
there, big room. And taking engineering drawing,
graded on neateness in August in Texas. And I'd be
doing engineering drawing, sweat just pouring
off of us. I'd take handkerchiefs. spread the
handkerchiefs all over the drawing board and just
leave a little space where I was actually making a
mark. Try to keep it, but I almost invariably have
failed. And I decided, hey, for me, I don't like
this kind of stuff. I'd much rather write
something. The junior buddies have slide rules?
Oh, yes. We all had slide rules. We wore them
like... Scabbers by our side. Oh, another thing
was here was ASTP, Army Specialized Training
Program, and they marched from class to class,
about 14 of them in a group, and they all had their
slide rules and all those things. Now, were they,
the ASTP, were they treated like Aggies? No, no.
The ASTP were a separate breed and
weren't considered by us to be Aggies. Where were
they housed? Some were in the dorms. I don't even, I
guess, in the new area. Okay. No, I'm not for sure.
They were just around somewhere. Did you go home
much that summer? No. No, I didn't. So you were here
all summer. Here all, pretty much. Any dates? No.
Were there any social events? I don't remember
any. I don't remember any of that summer. Football
season, yes. But that summer there were no dances,
no entertainers. That summer was pretty
something to be, pretty much, I mean, in fact, I did
not enjoy that summer. When they told me to go back,
the Marines said, oh, okay. And I came back, but I
enjoyed the fall and couldn't wait to get back from
it. All right, so you come back for the fall
semester knowing that you're probably going on
active duty at the end of that semester. Yeah, the
end or before it's over even. My mind was not on my
grades and studies, you can understand. Describe
what it was like then to go to your first football
games at A&M. Well, let me go back. May I go back? Oh,
of course. It's something that we've gone beyond
time. Oh, okay. I want to go back to this Hellwood
kid and what happened to him. It was a very bad,
terrible situation. Oh, and to answer some of your
questions why I can't remember too much about some
of these things, this kid made a mistake and told
another freshman that he, it was his parents who
wrote or sent his letter. Mm-hmm. to the
administration. This other freshman kid was
psychotic, neurotic, or something. And he did
things that were absolutely filthy,
unexcusable, and everything else. And so Fishel
would drop out of A&M. Well, he took human
excrement, spread it over his underclothes, and
things like that. Unpardonable. I remember
defending. Other people did that? He did it. This
one freshman did it. Oh. To Hellwood. Oh, to
Hellwood. Okay. One freshman to another. Yeah.
And... And Fish Hellwood dropped out of school and
said why he was doing it, though he did not know who
had done that. And so the administration, in their
wisdom, and they were not very wise, practiced
mass punishment. And they said for the rest of that
semester that any battery fuel artillery would be
canvassed. We couldn't go anywhere, do anything.
And kept it up and kept yelling out. They wanted to
find out who had done that to Fish Hellwood. And it
didn't come forth. Finally, they said that if we,
if Fish Hellwood, the one who had persecuted Fish
Hellwood, didn't come forth, they were going to
kick Mr. Bilbeck out of the Corps of Cadets. Well,
Fish, the guy who had done it, was really psycho. He
would take a lady's hat needle and drive it through
the keg of his leg. I've seen him do it.
He came forth at that, because we loved Mr.
Bilbeck. And though he once came confessed, and
all of a sudden we were told that we were to report
buildings, which are some housing over there,
some wooden housing kind of things, over near
where the engineering section is in that area,
where the engineering buildings are. We just told
them to fall out at night, about 8 o'clock at night.
We thought they were going to march us to the
railroad station and ship us all home.
I never heard such good marching. We were all
hitting together. We thought we were really going
to get it. And we got over there, and Captain Jack
Kimbrough, the brother of John Kimbrough, was a
attack officer, and he talked. And he came over and
says, and he totally misread the whole
psychology. He said, now don't hold it against
this boy for all he's done against, calling you to
get camp was awesome. The administration had made
a hero of this psychotic kid. It had worked an
absolutely reverse.
he had enforced the Aggie traditions, Aggie way of
life in a one way, but we didn't know, please
understand, we're not condoning what he did, but
what they had done was they didn't, they didn't
deal with it correctly. Absolutely, you know, the
Army taught me that don't use mass punishment, it
just makes an enemy out of the ones that you, make a
hero out of those that you think you're making an
enemy out of. And so, So they didn't even kick him
out of school. He flunked out of school. He was that
stupid, in a way. It seemed like in that time that
the admissions policy at A&M occurred during the
first year of school, maybe the first semester,
when they flunked out. About 50% of them dropped
out of school after one year, not the first
semester. The freshman year was pretty tough, and
it was kind of a separate. They didn't have what you
called... limited selective enrollment, but had
selective keeping, in a sense. Now, all of this
occurred that first summer? That first summer.
And so we were campers. And A Battery Field
Artillery has the highest attendance at our many
reunions, our reunions. We have the greatest
esprit because we were persecuted together. We
were persecuted. We were campers together. And we
had nothing to do but hang with each other. So when
you ask me, what did we do? Well, we didn't do very
much because we couldn't. I forgot that. Did y'all
have a nickname, your outfit? No. Really? No. All
right. So what was special about y'all was this
pulling together. They were very much pulled
together, yeah. And by and large, where were your
outfit buddies from? Were they small town Texas?
Small town and country? Lockhart. Well, some
were. But we had a lot from Lamar High School.
Houston? Houston, River Oaks area. Mm-hmm. One
thing they did do the second semester,
this is one of the strengths of A&M at that time, I
was in two of my buddies, same level academically,
good but not great, not brilliant brains, but good
students, on CPA now in Houston, invited me to have
lunch with their family sometimes. And I said,
great. And so one time I went out to one of these
parents with country school teachers outside
Lockhart, Texas. Lived in a frame house, very
clean, very nice. Don't be doing that. But it was
very, what you call, extremely modest home. Then I
went down on a train to Houston with Rocco Benowitz
and got off the train and got picked up by a
chauffeur driver on the other side. Driven out to
River Oaks. He laughs at this. I tell this story.
And it seemed like we
father was the executive vice president for
Weingarten, grocery chain. But the thing is, I was
totally shocked, because these were just two
buddies. They wore uniform, neither of them could
wear a cashmere coat or be in a Jewish fraternity or
anything like that. They were equals. Now as a
historian I say, If you want absolute equality,
you've got to impose those kind of rules. If you
want egalitarianism, you're going to have to have
certain rules and regulations, and you lose
individual freedoms and so forth. But it was nice
in that aspect for a period of time, but I wouldn't
want to live with it permanently. During that
first summer, did you write many letters, get many
phone calls? No, no. I was pretty
self-sufficient. I
had two older brothers. My mother did not pay a
whole lot of attention to me. She didn't need to.
And you didn't have a steady girlfriend at that
point? I didn't have a steady girlfriend, which is
another story we'll come to later on. So you go home
at the end of summer, and what did you tell your
family and your folks that A&M was like? I didn't.
You didn't? I assumed they knew. Okay. You know,
their sons had been here. My grandfather and his
son and his son were the first three generations of
A&M, and we We knew what A&M was like. I did not, I
knew what I was getting into when I came in. I wanted
to. Most of my classmates didn't, but I did. Now,
were most of your classmates, as far as you can
recall, first-generation college students?
Did you call me first-generation? My mother went,
but my father didn't.
All right, and you're only home a brief time
between summer and fall semester. Went home
Thanksgiving, I think. All right, then you come
back, and now there's a larger enrollment because
of the fall semester? Oh, yeah, when I came back, I
came back, I went in the Marines in January 22,
1945, was discharged. But wait, wait, let's do
this fall semester before you leave. You come
back, and were there many first semester fish that
fall? Not many some, but not many. So most of them,
most of the fish had come in the summer. Because
they wanted to squeeze as much college as they
could, because we all knew that unless we had some
physical, or were very, very young, even the very
young assumed that they were going to go into
the... Now, when did you become 18th? I became AT
the first of October of 1944. All right, that fall
semester. Right. All right, and you're still an
engineering major at this point? No. You changed.
I changed. To history. Changed to history.
Liberal arts, colon, history. Who did you go, do
you remember who you went to talk to about that?
Nobody. Nobody. Who did you turn to those first two
semesters for any kind of advice? Nobody. So you
determined... They had a course you were supposed
to take with a catalog. You just signed up for those
courses. Right, and in the fall, you had fewer
labs, so what did you do with your extra time?
Played more sports. Played more movies. And that
fall, you must have had some of the routine, Aggie
routine of football games, describe going to an
Aggie football game as a fish? One thing we did do, I
had a good friend, I knew him, I had known him,
Marshall. I would have labeled him my best friend,
who I knew was a great junior high school football
player, turned out to be a great high school
football player, turned out to be a great college
football player, and a great professional
football player, named Hawaii Tittle. we were
going to go over and play LSU, and Y.E. Tittle had
gone from Marshall to Texas, where the number one
guy was going to be a guy named Bobby Lane, and Y.E.
Tittle saw he was going to be second fiddle to Bobby
Lane, so he left Texas and went to LSU. Yelberton
Abraham Tittle. And so I wanted to go over and see
him, and we got instructions from the
administration that we were not to cut Saturday
morning classes. If we did we would be considered
absent without leave and we would be severely
disciplined and about 700 of us said to heck with
you and we got out and hitchhiked about 55th and
Line at the East Gate and got a ride in Finally came
in a car that caught on fire as we drove into
Navasota. So I got out there and that was the worst
thing that could happen to you because every car
going out of Navasota was filled with Aggies. So
another friend and I had to hire a taxi to take us to
Hempstead to get on that other highway from Austin
to Houston. So we hired a taxi and got to Hempstead
and went over. So we hitchhiked over and met this
other friend of mine, Rocker Benowitz, and we
hitchhiked over. got picked up by a Jewish couple
in a big Buick, the biggest Buick they made at the
time. And I told Brock this, and I said, you know,
they found his name was Rabinowitz, and they
couldn't do enough for us. Bought us lunch and
everything, went over there. You went all the way
to Baton Rouge? To Baton Rouge. And I came back, and
I got 20 demerits, which put me on academic conduct
probation, and wrote a letter to my parents. My
mother wrote back and said, My Robert, and she had
lost one son, I remember. Robert had my permission
to go. If you want to send him home, please do. She
had lost one son, and she was just as happy to have me
home. And what was the reaction here? I didn't hear
it. But I saw a copy of the letter. But you didn't get
any. She came back very hot at them. But it didn't
get you any extra trouble here? No, no. Send him
home if you want to send him home. In fact, about how
long did the trip from College Station to Baton
Rouge take? Well, we left about noon on Friday.
We did pretty good. Saturday morning, I think, we
got into Baton Rouge. I know there was nighttime
when we were riding in the back of a truck. open
bedded truck from Houston into Beaumont, and it
was cold. And then we got picked up at Beaumont by
the Stewart couple, and I guess it was early
morning, and they drove us on in. It's hard to get
those foggy. But coming back was an interesting
experience, too, because I was planning on taking
the train back, because I wanted to be sure. I
didn't want to hitchhike. I spent the night at the
athletic dorm at LSU.
I was in big trouble because it was noontime and it
was Sunday. And I had to, the game was a night game.
And so while he took me out to the highway, I started
filming. A guy came by and said, I only have a half a
tank of gas. I'm going to Houston, but I don't have
any gas tanks. If you want to take a chance with me,
okay. So I did, and that was before Interstate came
around. And he was talking to these little film
stations where you'd park the film station,
grocery store kind of thing, going and
sweet-talking these Cajun girls. And they'd fill
up his tank of gas and give him some stamps. He ended
up in Houston with a full tank of gas and a full book
of stamps. I'm not lying. I mean, as a historian,
this is the truth. But he would sweet-talk these.
do all kinds of things. And so I got to Houston
before the train did. They took a train from
Houston on it. Did people recognize Aggie
uniforms in Louisiana? Oh, yes. It was a way of
life. The blue lapels.
You got rides easily. Really easily. In all of your
hitchhiking, did you ever have any negative
experience? No, never. I have not yet gotten one.
Never, never, never. No homosexual advances.
I've heard a few of them where the driver was drunk,
going too fast, or maybe he'd been drinking a
little too much, but nothing worse than that.
Nothing worse than that, drunk. Let's see, and how
did the Aggies come out in that game? We lost the
game 7-0, though there were only 700 or so that were
stopped again. They made a mistake. People didn't
know, Aggie stand of the game. And they put us down,
the terrible seats down at the ground level. You
understand what happened then? Freshmen at the
lowest level, then sophomores, juniors, and
seniors standing up. So everybody all the way back
up there had to stand up too. Said, ow, balance run!
We stopped the game without yelling. First time
that I've ever seen it, you know. Just the 700 of us
yelled so loud that why couldn't we call some of
them? And if anybody today saw the yell leaders in
action then, would it have been quite similar to
today? Yes. There were four then, not five. Two
seniors, two juniors. But the yells were similar?
Yells were similar, except we had some that they
dropped.
When I was back, they used to have Lizzie when we won
the ball game. Have you heard of it? Is my hat on
straight? Let me hear a powder puff, sweet cherry
frosty. Son of a gun, Lizzie. And ladies. We see
you, ladies. We love you, ladies. So they had
those, and they were similar. Then also they would
yell, because they had limited substitution, One
of my friends, Country Higgins, had come off the
field. 15 for Higgins. Every time a substitute
came off the field, he got an individual cheer for
himself. Now, during those wartime years, the A&M
team was quite young, wasn't it? Yes,
particularly in 1943, the year before we came.
That was the Kitty Corps. Kitty Corps, yeah. They
did very well. Our freshman year, we did not do so
well. But they did reasonably well, but it wasn't
like the petticoat year. Right. When there was a
home game, describe the routine for you fish that
fall on a Saturday for game day. You got up, went to
class. Got up, went to class. And
I'm
trying to separate what's really fresh of my last
three years from my first year. We did not march in.
It's to the best of my memory. Was there a Yale
practice the night before? At that time, it was on
the steps of the YMCA building. And it was not at
midnight? It was not at midnight. We had a guy, the
lady was a Rhodes Scholar. He left here and went to
West Point after...